1450-Add Contrib First documentation. (#1451)
CivicActions/handbook: common-practices-tools/contribution/contrib-first.md

# Contrib First

> Whenever we are building something that could be of use to more than just one project or client, we build it as contributed work first.

Author: ```suggestion
Whenever we are building something that could be of use to more than one project or client, we build it as contributed work first.
```

## Rationale for contrib first

-   **Fiscal responsibility** - Building it and contributing it means that other government agencies will never have to pay to build the same thing. This helps agencies comply with Federal Source Code Policy: Achieving Efficiency, Transparency, and Innovation through Reusable and Open Source Software [OMB Memorandum M-16-21](https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/omb/memoranda/2016/m_16_21.pdf)
-   **Reusablity** - CivcActions other clients can benefit from work that was already done.

> -   **Security** - contributing our work to an open source project like Drupal means it it receives security coverage by the Drupal security team and the public.

Reviewer: I would say 'may' receive security coverage since there is a process to do that.

> -   **Security** - contributing our work to an open source project like Drupal means it it receives security coverage by the Drupal security team and the public.

Author: ```suggestion
-   **Security** - contributing our work to an open source project like Drupal means it may receive security coverage by the Drupal security team and the public.
```

-   **Avoiding the gift that never happens** - Clients are not typically supportive of taking working local software that was already built for them and in use by them and then paying to move or refactor that software to be open source. The benefit is too small for the cost. By building it as contributed code first, there is no extra cost.
-   **Development happens in the open** - The issue are public. The commits are public. Everyone can contribute.

> ## Examples of modules CivicActions built as contrib first

Reviewer: Can you link to https://drupal.org/civicactions as well to see more of CA's work?

Author: Great idea.

-   [Allow Only One](https://www.drupal.org/project/allow_only_one)
-   [Codit: Batch Operations](https://www.drupal.org/project/codit_batch_operations)
-   [Codit: Menu Tools](https://www.drupal.org/project/codit_menu_tools)
-   [Content Model & Site Documentation](https://www.drupal.org/project/content_model_documentation)
-   [Entity Field Fetch field](https://www.drupal.org/project/entity_field_fetch)
-   [GovDelivery Bulletins](https://www.drupal.org/project/govdelivery_bulletins)
-   [Mermaid Diagram Field](https://www.drupal.org/project/mermaid_diagram_field)
-   [Node Link Report](https://www.drupal.org/project/node_link_report)
-   [Post API](https://www.drupal.org/project/post_api)

> -   [Vertex AI Search](https://www.drupal.org/project/vertex_ai_search)

Author: ```suggestion
-   [Vertex AI Search](https://www.drupal.org/project/vertex_ai_search)

See more of [CivicActions Drupal contributions](https://drupal.org/civicactions).
```

> # Contrib First

Reviewer: @swirtSJW I forgot that titles should have frontmatter as well, e.g. https://github.com/CivicActions/guidebook/blob/master/practice-areas/project-management/project-management-checklists.md?plain=1#L1-L3

Author: Thank you.  Fixed.

Whenever we are building something that could be of use by more than one project or client, we build it as contributed work first, if our contract and security concerns allow for it. Contrib First is an approach we take with both patches to FOSS software and new contributions.

## Rationale for contrib first

-   **Fiscal responsibility** - Building it and contributing it means that other government agencies will never have to pay to build the same thing twice. This helps agencies comply with Federal Source Code Policy: Achieving Efficiency, Transparency, and Innovation through Reusable and Open Source Software [OMB Memorandum M-16-21](https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/omb/memoranda/2016/m_16_21.pdf)

> -   **Reusability** - CivcActions other clients can benefit from work that was already done.

Reviewer 2: Typo - should be CivicActions

Author: Fixed

> -   **Reusability** - CivcActions other clients can benefit from work that was already done.

Reviewer 2: What about broadening this to non-federal, non-CivicActions users - e.g. "CivicActions other clients and the public at large can benefit"

Author: Nice.   Done.

> -   **Security** - contributing our work to an open source project like Drupal means it may receive security coverage by the Drupal security team and the public.

Reviewer 2: Security coverage (at least in terms of Drupal) doesn't actually lead to detection of any new security issues - it's focus is really only on coordinating fixes (completed by project maintainers) for issues that are reported by external users and then notifying other users.
This is a benefit of course, but I am not sure it necessarily adds security on it's own. I would consider starting out with the "[many eyes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linus%27s_law)" argument. Essentially, by having many users it's more likely that security vulnerabilities will be detected over time (if it remains private, this is much less likely). Combining this with vulnerability reporting/notification infrastructure (like Drupal, but NVD is also a great example) you get the benefit of a more secure site with minimal additional effort.

Author: I adjusted this to include that.

-   **Avoiding the gift that never happens** - Clients are not typically supportive of taking working local software that was already built for them and in use by them, and then paying to move or refactor that software to become open source. The benefit is too small for the cost. By building it as contributed code first, there is no extra cost.
-   **Development happens in the open** - The issues are public. The commits are public. Everyone can contribute improvements.
-   **Reliability** - A solution built for contribution is often better designed, and better documented than a local solution meant to "just get it done". By putting our company and personal names on it publicly we commit to a quality product. Releasing a FOSS solution also increases the number of testers and edge cases that can surface and reduce bugs in the code.
-   **Scalability** - Contributed FOSS is more scalable than one-off solutions and can grow with the power of the FOSS community.
-   **Visibility** - When we release FOSS, CivicAction, our developers and our clients get positive representation as technology leaders and contributors.

> ## Examples of modules CivicActions built as Contrib First

Reviewer: Can we add some non Drupal ones also change to 'Example of open source repos ...) Examples:

* https://github.com/GetDKAN/cmsds-open-data-components (maybe link DKAN in general)
* https://github.com/drydockcloud
* This guidebook?
* https://github.com/CivicActions/accessibility
* https://github.com/GSA/openacr

Author: CivicActions Accessibility and our guidebook does not seem contrib first but maybe my interpretation is flawed.  

1. It seems quite specific to CivicActions rather than something anyone else can use unaltered.
2. It seems like it was not built for a client out of a client need
3. It seems more like it was past work, amalgamated into new public repos.

Reviewer: Ah I think both of these warrant #ca-stories stories ;)

Guidebook used to be a full fork of https://github.com/18F/handbook and on the readme we have this line:

> We'd like to thank the folks at 18F for [their handbook](https://github.com/18F/handbook), from which this documentation was forked. We welcome you to fork our documentation, or use the 18F handbook, which is licensed as CC0.

I also believe folks outside of CA have forked our guidebook.

For accessibility, that was also a full fork of https://github.com/18F/uswds-jekyll where we want to create not just the accessibility site but show how folks can quickly spin up sites on GitHub. Maybe this is a better example: https://github.com/CivicActions/ca-jekyll-vanilla

So yes it is a stretch but they were build from opensource projects to show how someone else can. Folks are welcome then to use our examples to build their own. Meets 1., not 2., and yes it is 3.

Author: I added 3 out of the 5.

> # Contrib First

Reviewer 2: Not sure quite where this goes, but we should be ensuring we have approval from clients before we contribute code, including talking about security, license and boilerplate the client may need (especially for new projects).
In many cases there are contract terms that cover this and we have or can get blanket approvals for various types of contribution.

Author: Hmm maybe a sentence or two in the top section.  I'll take a whack at it.

Author: I added this concept to the top.

## Rationale for contrib first

-   **Fiscal responsibility** - Building it and contributing it means that other government agencies will never have to pay to build the same thing. This helps agencies comply with Federal Source Code Policy: Achieving Efficiency, Transparency, and Innovation through Reusable and Open Source Software [OMB Memorandum M-16-21](https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/omb/memoranda/2016/m_16_21.pdf)
-   **Reusablity** - CivcActions other clients can benefit from work that was already done.
-   **Security** - contributing our work to an open source project like Drupal means it may receive security coverage by the Drupal security team and the public.
-   **Avoiding the gift that never happens** - Clients are not typically supportive of taking working local software that was already built for them and in use by them and then paying to move or refactor that software to be open source. The benefit is too small for the cost. By building it as contributed code first, there is no extra cost.
-   **Development happens in the open** - The issue are public. The commits are public. Everyone can contribute.

> ## Contrib first patches

Reviewer 2: This is pretty Drupal specific language - it would be nice to write this in more general terms (using Drupal as an example, or translating terms etc) as contribution to all the many FOSS projects we use should be our goal.

Author: Good point.  It does make a fare amount of assumptions related to Drupal.  I wanted this to be the reference specifically for Drupal that I could point to, mainly because the whole issue queue and contrib credit does not really exist elsewhere.  What if doubled down on making this one section Drupal specific and then added another section that was more agnostic for other FOSS contributions?

Reviewer 2: I think that would work!

In the case of changes needed to existing modules or Drupal core:

1. We contribute patches to existing issues or create new issues.

> 2. We use the compose-patches to apply local copies of the contributed patches.

Author: ```suggestion
2. We use the [composer-patches](https://github.com/cweagans/composer-patches) to apply local copies of the contributed patches.
```

## Contrib first modules

When a new module is needed, the process looks like this:

1. Gather requirements and identify MVP vs nice-to-haves
2. Search for existing modules that might solve the problem. (It might be easier to stretch an existing module than build a new one)
3. Choose a meaningful search engine friendly module name. (crowd sourcing name suggestions is recommended)
4. Create the Drupal project on Drupal.org

> 5. Populate the project page with a descrion of what is coming. List supporters as CivicActions and the client. If the client does not have a drupal.org page, encourage them to create one.

Reviewer: Maybe link to this page `practice-areas/engineering/drupal/#contribution-to-drupalorg-modules-and-themes` which describes how to do that?

Author: Great suggestion.  This change has been added.
